# Lau et al. (2025) DU Pathways TRAILS

**Demystifying regional water investment pathways under deep uncertainty: Integrating multi-objective reinforcement learning, robustness conflicts, and explainable artificial intelligence**

Lillian Lau<sup>1\*</sup>, Patrick M. Reed<sup>1</sup>,  and David F. Gold<sup>2</sup>

<sup>1 </sup>Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

<sup>2 </sup>Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands.

\* corresponding author:  lbl59@cornell.edu

## :memo: Abstract
Urban water utilities are adopting more advanced dynamic and adaptive pathway policy frameworks in the face of climate change, accelerating demand, and financial constraints. The inclusion of evolutionary multi-objective reinforcement learning (eMORL) has further enabled more efficient searches for high-performing infrastructure policy pathways that balance conflicting objectives and remain robustness amid hydrological and socioeconomic vulnerabilities across varying timescales. However, the technical outcomes of these frameworks, which include highly resolved state-action representations under deeply uncertain scenarios, are often complex and challenging to communicate to key decision-makers. To facilitate the navigation of the time-varying impacts of external deeply uncertain (DU) factors and clarify the representation of state-action dependencies across actors and over time, we contribute the DU Pathways Time-varying Regional Assessment of Infrastructure Pathways for the Long- and Short-term (TRAILS) framework. We apply TRAILS on the North Carolina Research Triangle, a challenging six-utility cooperative regional system confronting \$1 billion in in investments to support the maintenance and expansion of its water infrastructure by 2060. The TRAILS framework reveals that the timing, frequency, and magnitude of water supply infrastructure investments differ widely across the Triangle's actors and different sampled DU states of the world. We also discover critical periods of robustness conflict and transitions within and between each actor’s infrastructure pathways.  We apply explainable artificial intelligence (xAI) methods to reveal key DU factors that drive changes in robustness during these critical transition periods. Additionally, we utilize Information Theoretic sensitivity analyses to clarify the most consequential state information-action feedbacks that shape individual and regional performance and robustness. Overall, the analytics facilitated by the DU Pathways TRAILS framework elucidate how financially significant long-term investments and short-term operational actions shape individual utilities and overall regional robustness. 

## :pencil2: Journal reference
To cite this paper, please use the following citation _(Note: This work is currently in-prep and does not yet have a formal citation)_
```
Lau, L., Reed, P.M., and Gold, D.F. (2025). Demystifying regional water investment pathways under deep uncertainty: Integrating multi-objective reinforcement learning, robustness conflicts, and explainable artificial intelligence. _In prep_.
```

## :black_nib: Code reference
References for each minted software release for all code involved.  

These are generated by Zenodo automatically when conducting a release when Zenodo has been linked to your GitHub repository. The Zenodo references are built by setting the author order in order of contribution to the code using the author's GitHub username.  This citation can, and likely should, be edited without altering the DOI.

If you have modified a codebase that is outside of a formal release, and the modifications are not planned on being merged back into a version, fork the parent repository and add a `.<shortname>` to the version number of the parent and construct your own name.  For example, `v1.2.5.hydro`.

_your software reference here_

## :1234: Data reference

### Input data
Detailed information on generating the hydroclimatic realizations used in this experiment can be found 

Human, I.M. (2021). My input dataset name [Data set]. DataHub. https://doi.org/some-doi-number

_your input data references here_

### Output data
Reference for each minted data source for your output data.  For example:

Human, I.M. (2021). My output dataset name [Data set]. DataHub. https://doi.org/some-doi-number

_your output data references here_

## :computer: Contributing software
| Model | Version | Repository Link | DOI |
|-------|---------|-----------------|-----|
| WaterPaths | v1.0 | https://github.com/bernardoct/WaterPaths | 10.1016/j.envsoft.2020.104772 |
| SHAP | v0.46.0 | https://shap.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0138-9 |
| Scikit-Learn | v1.6.1 | https://scikit-learn.org/stable/ | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0138-9 |
| HDF5 for Python | v3.12.1 | https://docs.h5py.org/en/stable/index.html |  |

## :file_folder: Reproduce my experiment
Clone this repository to get access to code scripts used to generate risk of failure (ROF) tables, run DU Re-Evaluation, and reproduce the figures. 
Navigate into each folder (listed below) to refer to their detailed README files that provide step-by-step guidelines on how to navigate and execute their respective scripts.

### What each folder contains 
- `figure-code`: Contains the code required to generate most of the figures found in `figures`.
- `figures`: Contains all the figures that can be found in the paper.
- `scripts`: Contains all code and guidelines required to perform a smaller replication of the full experiment. The subfolders in this directory are labeled in the order of which they should be opened and attempted. 

### Prerequisites
1. Install the software components required to conduct the experiment from [contributing modeling software](#contributing-modeling-software)
2. Download and install the supporting [input data](#input-data) required to conduct the experiment
3. Follow the guidelines detailed in the README files of the `scripts` directory to re-create this experiment.

## :bar_chart: Reproduce my figures
Use the scripts found in the `figures` directory to reproduce the figures used in this publication. Follow the guidelines detailed in the README file of the `figrue-code` directory.

